JUDY WOODRUFF: We
close tonight with two
affectionate looks at Africa.
First, a journalist's
love of the continent,
family and his craft.
Jeffrey Brown begins with
our latest addition to
the "NewsHour" Bookshelf.
JEFFREY BROWN: As a
19-year-old college
student, Jeffrey Gettleman
traveled to East Africa
and fell in love with a place.
He also fell in love that
year with a woman back home.
Their time together and apart,
and his life and work covering
a continent as a Pulitzer
Prize-winning correspondent for
The New York Times, make up the
story told in "Love, Africa:
A Memoir of Romance,
War, and Survival."
Jeffrey Gettleman joins me now.
Welcome to you.
JEFFREY GETTLEMAN,
Author, "Love, Africa: A
Memoir of Romance, War,
and Survival": Thank
you.
JEFFREY BROWN: This is a place,
a region that you have looked
at for a long time in a certain
voice, right, as journalist.
But now you're presenting
a different voice.
What is this?
JEFFREY GETTLEMAN: Well, I feel
very conflicted about my work
sometimes in Africa, because,
as journalists, we
focus on conflict.
We focus on argument
and dispute.
JEFFREY BROWN: This is
the way we hear about
Africa most of the time.
JEFFREY GETTLEMAN: And this
is true for all journalists.
But my job as a journalist
in East Africa, I'm often
steeped in these conflicts.
But that wasn't why I came to
East Africa in the first place.
I came on a safari as
a student and was blown
away by the warmth, by
the sense of connectedness
between people, like, just
a different way of life.
And so this book, to me,
is a bit of an escape.
You know, often, we get
frustrated with what's
happening in today's world.
We feel sort of the woes
of the world on our back.
And I wanted to write a book
that celebrated something
that meant a lot to me.
JEFFREY BROWN: You were
drawn to this place.
It wasn't real obvious why.
JEFFREY GETTLEMAN: I think,
thinking more deeply about
what it was that really moved
me, it was experiencing a
part of the world that's very
different from how I grew up in
suburban Chicago, how most
of us grew up, a lot poorer,
a lot less developed.
But there was this spirit,
this sense of warmth and
openness among people.
Even though I had so much more
than the people I was around,
I felt very little resentment.
I felt very little bitterness.
I felt welcome in a part of
the world that couldn't be
any more different from what I
experienced.
JEFFREY BROWN: There is a
kind of fraught situation of
writing about Africa always,
right, how to
write about Africa.
You have to deal with that, as
a journalist and in this case.
JEFFREY GETTLEMAN: And I was
trying to be honest about that
in this book, because there's
many books written by
passing correspondents.
And the term in Africa
is mzungu, which means
white man, like gringo.
I cover these conflicts, I go
into a famine zone, I go into
a part of South Sudan where
people are killing each
other, and they're stuck.
Their houses have been burned.
They have lost everything
they have owned.
They have lost loved ones.
They're sharing their misery
with me, and I am dutifully
recording it in my notebook,
and then transmitting
it to the world.
And then I get on a plane and
take off, and go back to my
wife and kids and my comfortable
life.
And that's morally
problematic in some ways.
But that's my role.
We all have our roles.
The aid workers have their
roles in delivering aid.
The militaries have their
role in providing security.
And, as a journalist, my role
is to just try and gather as
much material, and open a window
to a different
part of the world.
JEFFREY BROWN: And, in this
book, there is the other part
of the love story, which is
your wife, who you
now go home too.
But you're open about the
problems of a marriage amid
the life you are leading.
She leaves behind a
life as a lawyer to
come and work with you.
JEFFREY GETTLEMAN: i think what
we struggled with is what a
lot of young people struggle
with.
We were both really determined
to pursue our careers.
She was dead set on being a
criminal defense attorney.
I really wanted to
be a journalist.
We had to go where the jobs
took us, and we did a lot of
damage to our relationship.
And we didn't respect and honor
what we suspected that we had,
which was a very special bond.
And there were years that we
screwed it up, and we threw
away a lot of time together.
JEFFREY BROWN: It's not
giving away the ending to say
that it worked out, right?
JEFFREY GETTLEMAN: Yes, we
were lucky enough to finally
sort of see which way is up.
And we have a wonderful
life in Kenya.
It's a great place
to raise a family.
We have two little boys
that were born there.
JEFFREY BROWN: What do you want
to convey here that we either
miss as viewer or watchers
of the world, or that
America itself misses,
right, in its policy?
JEFFREY GETTLEMAN:
Where do I begin?
OK, a couple quick things.
One is, in a lot of these
really bad situations,
there is an undercurrent
of hope, and of dignity,
and of humanity, and community.
For instance, I covered the
Westgate Mall massacre, where
some terrorists came into
a crowded mall in Nairobi, and
gunned down dozens of people.
They didn't kill more people,
because there was a response by
neighborhood police officers,
who were much more lightly
armed than these terrorists
that had assault rifles.
And these guys went streaming
into this mall, under fire, with
these cheap pistols, fighting
against these terrorists.
They were taking shots, they
were getting hit, they were
getting wounded, and they kept
going.
These guys came in as
basically volunteers,
and saved a lot of lives.
So, even in this moment, that
was there was still an element
of humanity, and community,
and pulling together
at the right time.
And I have seen that in war
zones, and in battle zones,
and in famine situations.
The one other thing I think is,
a lot of the problems in Africa
are because of things that
happened outside of
Africa, or because of
American policy especially.
And I wrote a bit in
this book about the
mistakes that the American
government has made under
different administrations.
It wasn't a Republican
problem or a Democrat problem.
It was kind of a
lack of interest.
And the results were famine,
and chaos, and pirates.
But some of that was because of
specific decisions the American
government had made that were
bad decisions and led to
a whole chain of events.
But in this part of the world,
a lot of people aren't paying
that close of attention.
And so I felt that it was my
responsibility to write a very
personal book, an accessible
book, a kind of escape,
adventure story, but
to do some educating.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right,
the book is "Love, Africa."
Jeffrey Gettleman,
thank you very much.
JEFFREY GETTLEMAN: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Read Jeffrey
Gettleman's reflections
on closing The New
York Times' East Africa
bureau.
His essay was published
by The Times today.